We have language in the twenty-first century for humanity’s shifting relationship with the nonhuman parts of the Earth System: Anthropocene, anthropogenic climate change, slow violence, global warming, the list goes on. Some of the language, we can trace to its first use. But the ideas that these words encompass have been incubating for at least two hundred years. (A blip in geological time.) The language of the industrial revolution shifted and changed and shifted and changed and at some point arrived at the nature-language of today, different in terminology and tone from the time of Thoreau. It’s in bad taste to go on for more than a paragraph about the weather. It snows in October and we say, “Thanks, climate change.”


I owe much insight into the shifting roles of nature to William Cronon’s seminal essay “The Trouble with Wilderness, or: Getting back to the wrong nature.” Cronon argues that the entire concept of nature is, of course, culturally constructed, othering humanity from nature in order to serve a sequence of shifting roles from the place of the devil in pre-romantic Europe to the place of God and the sublime in romantic Europe and America, to the vessel of Manifest Destiny in nineteenth-century America. For Cronon, “nature” as we have fashioned it is a potentially dangerous vessel as it offers the illusion of a reverse, an escape, from the conflicts (and environmental crises) of culture, when in fact this view of nature conceals the actual problems of climate change and cultural imperialism. To build his argument, he close-reads European and American nature writing over time:


“As late as the eighteenth century, the most common usage of the word ‘wilderness’ in the English language referred to landscapes that generally carried adjectives far different from the ones they attract today. To be a wilderness then was to be ‘deserted,’ ‘savage,’ ‘desolate,’ ‘barren’--in short, a ‘waste,’ the word’s nearest synonym. Its connotations were anything but positive, and the emotion one was most likely to feel in its presence was ‘bewilderment’--or terror” (Cronon 30).


“But the romantic sublime was not the only cultural movement that helped transform wilderness into a sacred American icon during the nineteenth century. No less important was the powerful romantic attraction of primitivism, dating back at least to Rousseau—the belief that the best antidote to the ills of an overly refined and civilized modern world was a return to simpler, more primitive living” (Cronon 35).


I find Cronon’s work on the shifting language around nature in 18th-20th century Europe and America compelling from a digital humanities perspective. Close-reading Thoreau, he observes that one description of Mount Katahdin in Maine “owes as much to Wordsworth and other romantic contemporaries as to the rocks and clouds of Katahdin itself” (Cronon 34). Writing is some of the best evidence we have for the shifting ideologies of the past. And the 18th-20th centuries were the birth, adolescence, and maturation of the novel as a literary form. What might a study of long nineteenth century writing bring up? Could it quantitatively chart the waves of wasteland to sublime to frontier?


The novel came of age at the same time as my favorite monster, another conceptual box that’s maybe as fraught and dynamic as nature: the Anthropocene. In their initial coining of the term, atmospheric chemist Paul Crutzen and ecologist Eugene Stoermer proposed the late eighteenth century--the industrial revolution--as the dawn of the epoch, based on a study of the carbon content in ice cores dated to the industrial revolution. They settled on 1784, the year of the invention of the steam engine, as an arbitrary number (Crutzen and Stoermer 17-18). As the industrial revolution chugged forward and the world seemed bigger and moved faster, the novel came into its own: a form big and complicated enough to be yet another convenient vessel for ideas. 


Curious to see if the sublime could be distant-read in a one-novel corpus, I did something that was free. I pulled the plain text of Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein, of 1818, from Project Gutenberg, chiseled away Gutenberg’s asterisks and terms of service, and dropped the full text into Antconc. Written in the very early years of Crutzen’s anthropocene, the novel form still relatively young, Frankenstein falls at what would be the early end of an anthropocene corpus. Its pages (or virtual scroll) also, I remembered, dedicate enough space to descriptions of nature to rival Thoreau’s journal. So what kinds of words show up around the word “nature,” in Frankenstein?


The concordances cut incisively to the novel’s tensions around humans interfering with nature--little stuff, like raising the dead, and big stuff, like the backdrop of sublime nature in the romantic style that was all the rage. In concordance with nature we find “citadel of nature,” “adorns,” “decayed,” “overcome,” “gladness,” and “mysterious.” “Human nature” might pose a challenge for a model, as I am sorting that as separate from the sublime with my non-computer brain (should I, post-Cronon?). But then, human nature and nature nature appear to be tied. Some passages:


“Even broken in spirit as he is, no one can feel more deeply than he does the beauties of nature. The starry sky, the sea, and every sight afforded by these wonderful regions seem still to have the power of elevating his soul from the earth” (Shelley, n.p. letter from August 13th, 17--).

“...but many things will appear possible in these wild and mysterious regions which would provoke the laughter of those unacquainted with the ever-varied powers of nature…” (Shelley, n.p. Letter from August 19th, 17--).


Even just the top of the collocates results are interesting. The words that appear with the word “nature” are charged with the romantic sublime, appealing either to vastness (“starry,” “maternal,” “immortal,” and “imperial”) or to the emotional response of the observer (“overpowering,” “outraged,” “charms”). Nature, in Frankenstein, is awe-inspiring, overwhelming. Like looking at a large dataset. But the language around it is weirdly extractive--the above passages are Captain Walton’s letters; Frankenstein is the stranger whose soul  nature has the power of “elevating...from the earth.” Wilderness functions as a place of refuge and wildness in exactly the way Cronon critiques: a place to escape problems of culture without dismantling or changing them. What might a broader study of stylistic trends find? Do what is nature like to another writer in 1818? To others by 1840, 1890? The question I did manage to answer, though, is that the sublime is given to distant reading. It’s stuffed full of more big, rapturous nouns than you’d find in a spelling bee. Charting its rise and fall could be an excellent starting point for a digital project.


I am interested in what it would look like to examine a large corpus of novels from the long nineteenth century for the compositional shifts of the early anthropocene--as Cronon finds in the writing of Muir and Thoreau--and so I will end with questions. Could his sublime-to-frontier trajectory be quantified? Outside Cronon’s scope, did language trend around mill towns, and/or the pastoral places outside of them? When and where? And what about different styles of novel? The Voyant results for Elizabeth Gaskell’s  Mary Barton are almost all sentimental dialogue tags, but the full text is what it says on the tin: “a tale of Manchester life” in all its dark, chilly, hungry, urban detail. How would Gaskell’s Manchester map on Shelley’s Arctic? What might an exercise in topic modeling turn over about the things nineteenth century Europe and America needed from nature, physically and culturally, as documented in their novels?



Cronon, William. “The Trouble With Wilderness: Or, Getting Back to the Wrong Nature.” Out of the Woods, edited by Char Miller and Hal Rothman, University of Pittsburgh Press, 1997, pp.28-50. JSTOR, https://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctt7zw9qw.8. Accessed 27 Nov. 2020.

Crutzen, Paul and Stoermer, Eugene. “The ‘Anthropocene.’” Newsletter of the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme, May 2000, pp.17-18. http://www.igbp.net/download/18.316f18321323470177580001401/1376383088452/NL41.pdf. Accessed 1 Dec. 2020.  	

Moretti, Franco. The Way of the World. Verso, 1987.

Shelley, Mary. Frankenstein. Project Gutenberg, prepared by Judith Boss, Christy Phillips, Lynn Hanninen, and David Meltzer. https://www.gutenberg.org/files/84/84-h/84-h.htm. Accessed 1 Dec. 2020.
