---
layout: post
title: "Interdisciplinary Digital Environments"
categories:
  - Edge Case

---

Reading in two veins of literary studies that are each, by nature, interdisciplinary--the Digital Humanities and ecocriticism--has clued me into the shifting roles of the humanities, and the academy at large, in the twenty-first century. I am still searching for disciplinary crosstalk on this specific overlap. DH and EH (the environmental humanities) are both, to my understanding, taking issue with the role of the humanities, and the nature of the humanities, in an era defined by the overwhelming wall of data. It is impossible to fully know a natural environment with one set of human eyes just as it is impossible to know a set of big data with one set of human eyes. I am seeing two branches of the humanities attempt to navigate humanity in the complex environment of now.


One of the central tensions of DH concerns what humans can do, and what digital tools can do, and how to reconcile and blend those things in an age of data. The nature of the humanities ends up being called into question, when humanity is put in dialogue with its limits at a time when academia is shifting. 


One of the central tensions of EH concerns what it means to be human in the Anthropocene, in which humanity cannot comprehend all of--yet is impacting on a geological scale--its environment. 


At the nexus of these fields, environment becomes data, and data becomes environment. An illustrative example I have encountered is the prospective mapping project at the Thoreau Drawings Archive. Spearheaded by Abbie Levesque, the mapping project aims to use GIS software--[Leaflet] (https://leafletjs.com/)--to speculate the specific environments that Thoreau sketched from, based on the information available in the journal. Thoreau’s project was a kind of environmental data analysis. Levesque’s project analyzes Thoreau’s data, and works to create geological (meta)data from it, using a newly available digital tool [("Thoreau Drawings Archive: Map")](https://thoreaudrawings.northeastern.edu/map/). In another project more analogue but also more explicitly braiding environment and data, Heather Houser has written on the use of aerial perspectives in contemporary speculative fiction to capture both large-scale environmental perspectives and large-scale data perspectives, in a book fittingly titled [Infowhelm] (https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.7312/hous18732). 
In these works, I see EH and DH encountering each other in a way that could be, if more widely explored, extremely generative. These scholars are having similar discussions about concepts too large to be singularly understood in two separate sets of disciplinary terms, yet their methods, if different, negotiate some of the same waters. 


Citing each other, and exploring each other’s methods, could consolidate and critique some of the identity crisis that the humanities seem to be having in this age of big data and climate change. In “The Climate of History,” the fulcrum on which historian Dipesh Chakrabarty’s four theses turns is thesis number one, which takes issue with the concept of the humanities that we have had, in shifting discourses, since the enlightenment: “Anthropogenic explanations of climate change spell the collapse of the age-old humanist distinction between natural history and human history” (Chakrabarty 6). Chakrabarty’s four theses suggest a de-centering of humanity from the Earth-system, a consideration of the species as part of the whole rather than sovereign over it. Now, at the risk of being dramatic, digital technology is overhauling how we understand knowledge at a scale that is reminiscent of an enlightenment. As DH expands, and at times transmutes, the mission and scope of the humanities, EH questions the humanities itself and advocates for a de-centering of the human. 


Ted Underwood has written that “the challenges that confront 21st-century citizens are not always arguments that come one by one to be evaluated. Information is more likely to come in cascades, guided both by networks of friends and by statistical models that anticipate our preferences” (Underwood, “Humanities”). This is Houser’s “infowhelm” in a digital environment. These two fields are negotiating terms for separate--but intertwined--contemporary issues of scale.


I wonder if digital technology is something humans created that is separate from nature (though based on the humans who create it and reproducing their paradigms). And if so, are digital techniques an important way to not only examine the vast geological scale of the climate crisis, but de-center the human from it? Both of these interdisciplinary fields of the humanities are relatively new, and both question the nature of knowledge as we experience it in a world that has changed beneath our feet---because of our feet.


As I explore both fields, I look forward to further articulating this interplay. Ted Underwood has also written that “we need to realize that historians’ traditions of caution and relativism are not alien to the sparkling new world of computers” (Underwood, “Humanities”). I am experiencing both the humanistic caution that this overlap has been articulated and I just haven’t been able to find it--and the data science question of why I cannot find it. Have I simply not found the keywords yet? My generation is likely to witness acclimatization to global, digital connection, and to global climate change. Even the words and metaphors are sharing. In the midst of that, an interdisciplinary theorization of the new scale on which we aim to experience knowledge--if it is not already out there--will be integral.




Works Cited


Chakrabarty, Dipesh. “The Climate of History: Four Theses.” Critical Inquiry, vol. 35, no. 2 (Winter 2009), pp. 197-222. JSTOR. 	https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/596640


Houser, Heather. Infowhelm: Environmental Art and Literature in an Age of Data. Colombia University Press, 2020. JSTOR. 		 	 	https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.7312/hous18732.12.


Underwood, Ted. “Why an Age of Machine Learning Needs the Humanities.” Public Books, 2018. https://www.publicbooks.org/why-an-age-of-machine-learning-needs-the-humanities/.
